## Trilemma of data-based taxation approaches and its solution through digital documentation using process mining and blockchain methods

*Jan Winterhalter, Andreas Niekler* [1]

For international tax law, it is of central importance how the clearest possible, value-added-oriented and traceable control of increasingly digital, cross-border supply and service relationships can be achieved.

Particularly in the case of profit-sharing methods which regard "data" as the tax connecting factor, it does not seem possible to meet the criteria of clear localisation, value-added-oriented distribution and proper control simultaneously - a trilemma. Independent of the question of whether data should represent a new digital nexus, the authors in their interdisciplinary research project investigate how this trilemma could be solved with the help of process mining and blockchain methods. 

Previous solution strategies suggest either a purely quantitative or qualitative methodology. Thus, it should already be possible to quantitatively measure data or users in bits and bytes in a first step in order to assign them to the respective state in a second step. Equally conceivable is a taxation approach that considers the underlying algorithm itself in the form of a purely qualitative methodology. In this formal-technical methodology, data would be assigned to countries according to the weighting of the respective algorithm. However, it remains questionable how a corresponding allocation of value added contributions, e.g. in the case of neuronal networks, should be possible and at the same time control despite black boxes, susceptible traceability in view of such technical challenges and, moreover, without disclosure of business secrets.

Therefore, we propose a process-oriented approach that could make it possible to meet the criteria of the trilemma - localization, value creation, and control - far away from the user- and algorithm-specific details. We use the Business Process Model Notation 2.0 (BPMN) as the central tool for the documentation of digital goods and services. As a form of process mining, BPMN describes all processes involved in the value chain, which could even make digital value chains more comparable. 

However, whether this process-oriented application can meet all the requirements of the trilemma remains open and requires further research. In particular, the authors therefore aim at a comparison with another, intensively discussed methodology, which should allow for a comprehensive transparency: The logging of individual transactions by a block chain network. In these networks the participants confirm each other manipulations of data (transactions) in encrypted data blocks. The participants can be companies, (government) organizations or private individuals.

The research is structured in the following sections: 

1. Digitalized economy and its challenges for the International Tax Law - a short overview: 
In this section we will give you a short explanation of the current Tax System, the need of a fiscal connection in International Tax Systems and why a digital nexus instead of a nexus like personal or production sites could be a solution worth trying. Therefore we are keen to know if the approach of a digital nexus is worth to been taken -  or not.

2. A digital nexus - how to anchor the increasingly digital economy: In this section we want to analyse which digital nexus could be a possible solution for a fiscal connection, e.g. data itself, the amount of data, the energy needed to send data etc. As a matter of facts there is a huge variet of digital connections we could think of. So a scientific exchange which one is the best (or worst) is more than welcome.  

3. A suitable method to document digital services and deliveries - Process Mining, Blockchain and API: In this section the object is to find the best solution how to document this digital services and deliveries regarding to their digital anchor point. Therefore we want to find out the pros and cons of those methods and if there are more to come.

4. A code space for a simulation - Adapting the best method by simulation & comparison: In the last section we want to apply the findings of our research, implement different methods in a simulation and compare the results to find the best solution to document digital tracks and in the end tackle base erosion and profit shifting. You are welcome to code with us to fabricate a simulation of an Multi National Enterprise and its simplied function profiles to find out which method works the best in an digital age. 

[1] *Andreas Niekler is a research assistant at the Institute of Computer Science at the University of Leipzig and works, among other things, in the project group "Data Mining and Value Creation"; Jan Winterhalter is a doctoral student at the Institute for Tax Law under Professor Dr. Marc Desens with a research focus on "Taxation of the digitalized economy". The research project is institutionally integrated in the project group "Digitisation and Law" of the Research Acadamy Leipzig. Project supervisor is Professor Dr. Marc Desens. The research group is interdisciplinary and aims to create a link between tax law and computer science. So far, there is an informal exchange with the administration (BMF/tax audit offices of the federal states) and MNE. An accompanying series of essays on the research project is being planned, the first publication will be in the first issue of Digitax February 2020. The first simulations of our process-oriented application in simplified function profiles of MNE should take place at the end of 2020. A summarising strategy paper on the trilemma of data-based taxation approaches is planned for mid 2021.*
